Amplitudes and intervals.
All of the waves on an ECG tracing and the intervals between them have a predictable time duration, a range of acceptable amplitudes (voltages), and a typical morphology.
Any deviation from the normal tracing is potentially pathological and therefore of clinical significance.
For ease of measuring the amplitudes and intervals, an ECG is printed on graph paper at a standard scale: each 1 mm (one small box on the standard ECG paper) represents 40 milliseconds of time on the x-axis, and 0.1 millivolts on the y-axis.
P wave	The P wave represents depolarization of the atria.
Atrial depolarization spreads from the SA node towards the AV node, and from the right atrium to the left atrium.
The P wave is typically upright in most leads except for aVR; an unusual P wave axis (inverted in other leads) can indicate an ectopic atrial pacemaker.
If the P wave is of unusually long duration, it may represent atrial enlargement.
Typically a large right atrium gives a tall, peaked P wave while a large left atrium gives a two-humped bifid P wave.	<80 ms.
PR interval	The PR interval is measured from the beginning of the P wave to the beginning of the QRS complex.
This interval reflects the time the electrical impulse takes to travel from the sinus node through the AV node.
A PR interval shorter than 120 ms suggests that the electrical impulse is bypassing the AV node, as in Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome.
A PR interval consistently longer than 200 ms diagnoses first degree atrioventricular block.
The PR segment (the portion of the tracing after the P wave and before the QRS complex) is typically completely flat, but may be depressed in pericarditis.	120 to 200 ms.
QRS complex	The QRS complex represents the rapid depolarization of the right and left ventricles.
The ventricles have a large muscle mass compared to the atria, so the QRS complex usually has a much larger amplitude than the P wave.
If the QRS complex is wide (longer than 120 ms) it suggests disruption of the heart's conduction system, such as in LBBB, RBBB, or ventricular rhythms such as ventricular tachycardia.
Metabolic issues such as severe hyperkalemia, or tricyclic antidepressant overdose can also widen the QRS complex.
An unusually tall QRS complex may represent left ventricular hypertrophy while a very low-amplitude QRS complex may represent a pericardial effusion or infiltrative myocardial disease.	80 to 100 ms.
J-point	The J-point is the point at which the QRS complex finishes and the ST segment begins.
The J-point may be elevated as a normal variant.
The appearance of a separate J wave or Osborn wave at the J-point is pathognomonic of hypothermia or hypercalcemia.
ST segment	The ST segment connects the QRS complex and the T wave; it represents the period when the ventricles are depolarized.
It is usually isoelectric, but may be depressed or elevated with myocardial infarction or ischemia.
ST depression can also be caused by LVH or digoxin.
ST elevation can also be caused by pericarditis, Brugada syndrome, or can be a normal variant (J-point elevation).
T wave	The T wave represents the repolarization of the ventricles.
It is generally upright in all leads except aVR and lead V1.
Inverted T waves can be a sign of myocardial ischemia, left ventricular hypertrophy, high intracranial pressure, or metabolic abnormalities.
Peaked T waves can be a sign of hyperkalemia or very early myocardial infarction.	160 ms.
Corrected QT interval (QTc)	The QT interval is measured from the beginning of the QRS complex to the end of the T wave.
Acceptable ranges vary with heart rate, so it must be corrected to the QTc by dividing by the square root of the RR interval.
A prolonged QTc interval is a risk factor for ventricular tachyarrhythmias and sudden death.
Long QT can arise as a genetic syndrome, or as a side effect of certain medications.
An unusually short QTc can be seen in severe hypercalcemia.	<440 ms.
U wave	The U wave is hypothesized to be caused by the repolarization of the interventricular septum.
It normally has a low amplitude, and even more often is completely absent.
A very prominent U wave can be a sign of hypokalemia, hypercalcemia or hyperthyroidism.